---
title: True Costs
date: "2018-11-01"
layout: post
draft: true
path: "/posts/true-costs/"
category: "Fundamentals"
tags:
  - costs
description: An exploration of what things cost, and how much of our money is spent on coordination.
---
> **tl;dr** -

There's a term in manufacturing called markup.

> markup
> noun
> 1 the amount added to the cost price of goods to cover overheads and profit: a mark-up of 50 per cent.

The dictionary definition includes the example of 50%. This is an industry
standard across many industries. Buy something for $50, sell it for $100. That's
how businesses pay for their own costs. Staff, heating, marketing, risks, etc.

The things that we buy have usually passed through many hands to reach us. Each
time a product, or raw materials to make a product, pass from one company to
another, there is a markup added.

Some of that markup is for hard costs, like staff, buildings, etc. Some of it
covers costs like managers, marketing, and other "indirect" or "soft" costs.

Digital startups focus on two numbers, Customer Lifetime Value (CLV) and
Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC). If each new customer will make a profit for the
company of $100 over 3 years, that's CLV. If the company spends $50 to find that
customer, that's CAC. In this example, the customer can expect to make a $50
profit over 3 years per new customer.

## Coordination costs

We could think about costs like marketing and management as coordination costs.
Marketing is about finding people who want to buy products. Management is about
getting the right people and resources at the right time, managing risks, etc.
These are coordination functions. Get the right things to the right place at the
right time. Or put another way, get the optimal things to the optimal place at
the optimal time.

These roles do not directly create human value. If I click on an online ad (paid
marketing) or a friend recommends me a product (free marketing), the result to
me is the same. The value is in the product, whatever it may be. Finding the
product is a necessary source of cost, but it's not a source of value.

Much of the financial system can be put in this category. It's a necessary cost,
but not a source of real value.

How much of our money goes towards these types of costs? It's very hard to
calculate. My untested estimate is that these types of coordination costs
account for 80-90% of a typical person's expenditure.

## True costs

If that figure of 80-90% is true, put another way, the true cost of a purchase
is 10-20% of what you pay.

The other costs are necessary, but they are not a source of value. If I buy
something I don't mind how many managers the company has. I don't care how much
money they spend on advertising. These are costs I would prefer to avoid if I
could, but of course that's not really possible today.

## Automated coordination

What if we could reduce these types of coordination costs by 10x or 100x? What
if we could use protocols and automation to solve many of these coordination
costs? What would the world look like if everything we buy was reduced by 90%?

It's possible to consider that this is what the Bitcoin protocol does. The
protocol needs miners, software developers, and users. Yet the protocol itself
spends zero money on marketing or software development. The protocol does create
new bitcoins and give them to the miners.

Thousands or tens of thousands of software developers work on or around Bitcoin.
All without a controlling company and without any meetings. Of course people
have meetings about Bitcoin, but the protocol itself organises no meetings at
all.

This is one building block of the vision behind Protocols for Humanity. We
believe that the things we buy could become 10x cheaper if we can automate much
of this coordination cost.
